T
of importance among the truths
T HERE IS AN ORDER
of faith which Catholics accept.
In other words, not all truths or
doctrines are equally central to
the basic gospel message of Jesus.
The Church does not consider
beliefs about Mary as being equal in
importance to truths about God – the
Father, Son and Holy Spirit.
The Catholic Church has always
given prominence to Mary’s role in
God’s saving plan. Especially in the
past century and a half, the Church
has made some pronouncements about
her, like the Immaculate Conception
and the Assumption. We shall consider
these truths later, but for the moment,
we can say that there is no explicit or
even implicit statement of these beliefs
in the Bible. However, the Church
has always claimed to be guided by
the same Holy Spirit who inspired
the authors of the Scriptures. As
with all Christian truth, the Church’s
understanding of Mary has deepened
and become clearer with the passing of
time under the guidance of the Spirit.
Beliefs and teaching
What might appear to be new
teachings about Mary are sometimes
o!cial statements or clarifications by
the Church about matters that were
taught and believed for a long time.
Recent doctrinal statements about Mary
should be seen as a!rming beliefs that
were already commonly held in earlier
centuries of Christianity.
Again, there are some who have the
wrong impression that the Church in
recent times has adopted the policy
of ‘benign neglect’ as far as Mary is
concerned. It is not true that genuine
Marian devotion is being played down,
or phased out of Catholic life. Perhaps
this wrong impression arose because
80
the Second Vatican Council (1962-1965)
did not devote a special document to
Mary, as some of the Council Fathers
wished. Instead the Council treated her
in a chapter (ch. 8, the final chapter)
of the Constitution on the Church. As
we shall see, this is surely the right
perspective and the right context in
which to see the role of Mary, mother
of Jesus and our mother.
The Second Vatican Council did
warn against adopting either of two
extreme positions. It mentioned the
unique dignity of the mother of God,
but also stated that Catholics should
avoid the falsity of exaggeration
on the one hand, and the excess of
narrow mindedness on the other
(no 67). So while beliefs about Mary
should not be considered as equal
in importance to the fundamental
Christian truths about the nature
of God and redemption, nor should
Mary’s important role in God’s plan
of salvation be ignored or neglected.
The proper Catholic balance of Marian
devotion is to consider Mary both in
her privileged relationship to Jesus
and her symbolic relationship to the
Church as a model and woman of faith.
Mary in the Scriptures
We turn now to look closely at what
the Scriptures tell us about Mary’s
role in God’s plan of salvation. A
careful study of the New Testament
reveals a gradual development in
understanding of the importance of
Mary in God’s plan. The earliest New
Testament writings do not assign to
her any special significance. The first
New Testament ‘books’ to be written
were the letters of Paul, which were
composed in the 50’s of the first
century, and therefore only 20-30
years after the death and resurrection
of Jesus. In these letters, the mother
MOSAIC OF NATIVITY IN ST. SEBASTIAN CATHEDRAL, BRATISLAVA
of Jesus is mentioned only once, and
even then not by name (Galatians 4:4).
Similarly, the first Gospel to be written,
the Gospel of Mark (c. 65 AD), begins
with John the Baptist introducing
Jesus to the people as an adult about
to begin his public ministry. There
are no infancy narratives in Mark, no
stories about events connected with the
conception, birth or childhood of Jesus.
This shows that the gospel message
in the early years of the Church was
proclaimed without any concentration
on, or perhaps even reference to, the
role of Mary.
Indeed if we had only the Gospel of
Mark, we might well conclude that the
mother and the family of Jesus were
unsympathetic to his mission. Mark
3:21 tells us that Jesus’ family they went
out to restrain him.
A later passage in Mark (3:31-35)
implies that Jesus dismissed his mother
and members of his family, and instead
nominated as his true family those who
did the will of God. Mark’s Jesus seems
to make a distinction between his
MARY, MOTHER OF THE CHURCH
blood relatives and those who accept
him in faith.
However, the later Gospels,
especially the Gospels of Luke and
John, present Mary as having a positive
and prominent role in God’s plan of
salvation. Obviously, the Holy Spirit
guided later New Testament writers
to an understanding of Mary and her
role that went beyond what the earlier
authors understood.
Infancy narratives
Thus the Gospels of Matthew and
Luke, written about twenty years
after the Gospel of Mark, include at
the beginning of their accounts a
description of events surrounding
the conception, birth and childhood
of Jesus. Naturally, Mary figures
prominently in these infancy narratives
(Matthew 1-2, Luke 1-2), especially
in Luke’s version of events. Luke
introduces Mary into his narrative in
a passage (1:26-38) which describes
the event commonly known as ‘The
Annunciation’. In this story God reveals
81
to Mary, through Gabriel, his angel or
messenger, that he has chosen her to be
the mother of his Son. Mary emerges
As with the other saints, we pray not so
much to Mary as with her, recognising
that God alone is the One who ultimately
accepts and grants our prayers.
from this account as a model for us of
faith and of obedience to God’s will.
These qualities are summed up in her
sublime response to God’s message:
Here am I, the servant of the Lord; let
it be with me according to your word
(Luke 1:38).
At this point, in the light of what we
said earlier about the low profile given
to Mary in Mark’s Gospel, we note
Luke’s version of Jesus’ response when
he (Jesus) is told that his mother and ...
brothers are standing outside wanting to
see him (Luke 8:20-21). If we compare
this passage with Mark 3:31-35, we see
that according to Luke, Jesus makes no
distinction between Jesus’ family and
his true disciples. Mary is certainly
included among those who hear the
word of God and do it (Luke 8:21).
Model of discipleship
Her obedient response to the angel’s
message in Luke 1:38 (let it be with
me according to your word) depicts
her as the first person in the Gospel
story to hear the word of God and
do it. She thus perfectly fulfils what
Jesus describes as the mark of the true
disciple. As well as being his mother,
Mary was also his first disciple and the
model of all true discipleship.
Then follows Luke’s account of
Mary’s visit to her relative Elizabeth,
who had also received – along with
her husband Zechariah – a revelation
from God that she was to be the
mother of the one who
would be known as John
the Baptist (1:39-56; cf
1:13). On this occasion
Luke attributes to Mary
a beautiful song of
joy and praise of God,
known (from its opening
word in Latin) as the
Magnificat. In this song,
Mary acknowledges the great privilege
God has given her: My soul magnifies
the Lord, and my spirit rejoices in God
my Saviour, for he has looked with
favour on the lowliness of his servant.
Surely, from now on all generations will
call me blessed; for the Mighty One has
done great things for me, and holy is his
name (1:46-49).
Luke describes the birth of Jesus
in most humble circumstances, in a
stable, where he is visited by a group
of shepherds who report what God has
revealed to them about the new-born
child: a Saviour, who is the Messiah
(2:11). On hearing their testimony, Mary
treasured all these words and pondered
them in her heart (2:19).
When Mary and Joseph took the
child Jesus to the temple of Jerusalem to
present him to the Lord (Luke 2:22), they
were met by a devout old man named
Simeon who was inspired by the Holy
Spirit to recognise the baby as the one
who had been promised by God to Israel
and who would be a light for revelation
to the Gentiles (2:25-32). To Mary,
Simeon addressed the words a sword
will pierce your own soul too (2:35). This
was a prophecy that Mary’s own faith
would be challenged in a special way,
and probably also contains a reference
that she would experience anxiety
and fear and sorrow as a result of the
mission awaiting her Son.
82
FLUCHT NACH ÄGYPTEN (FLIGHT INTO EGYPT, HANS SANDREUTER 1850-1901)
MARY, MOTHER OF THE CHURCH
Such fear and anxiety would surely
have been felt by her in the incident
described by Matthew in 2:13-15. Mary
and Joseph had to take the child and
make a hurried escape to Egypt, to
avoid the murderous plans of King
Herod who sought to destroy any
potential rival. Again, Luke tells us
that when Jesus was 12 years old,
he was taken by Mary and Joseph to
Jerusalem for the feast of the Passover.
He became separated from them, and
Luke tells us he was missing for three
days. On finding him, in the temple,
Mary in her anxiety complained: Child,
why have you treated us like this? Look,
your father and I have been searching
for you in great anxiety. To which Jesus
replied: Why were you searching for me?
Did you not know that I must be in my
Father’s house? Luke says they did not
understand what he said to them, but
Mary ... treasured all these things in her
heart (2:48-51).
THE ‘WOMAN’
AND THE ‘HOUR’
Mary appears again on two significant
occasions during Jesus’ public ministry,
as reported in the Gospel of John. These
incidents occur at the beginning and
end of Jesus’ ministry. The first occasion
was a wedding celebration in the town
of Cana in Galilee, at which both Mary
and Jesus were among the guests (2:1-
11). The second occurs beneath the
cross of the dying Jesus where Mary
was present in the company of the one
known in John’s Gospel as the disciple
whom he loved (19:25-27). There are
remarkable similarities between the
Cana incident and the scene at the foot
of the cross. Most significantly, on both
occasions Jesus addresses his mother
with the unusual title ‘woman’. The use
of the word ‘woman’ to address one’s
mother was certainly not the normal
practice among the Jews at the time.
83
VIRGIN MARY CHAPEL IN MONASTERY OF THE SISTERS OF CHARITY OF ST. VINCENT DE PAUL (RIJEKA, CROATIA)
It is also worth noting that John in
his Gospel never refers to the mother
of Jesus by her proper name ‘Mary’.
At both Cana and the Cross, she is
referred to simply as ‘the mother’
of Jesus. Taken together, these two
facts suggest that John’s intention
is to present her not simply as an
individual. He is interested rather in
her as in someone fulfilling a definite
role or function.
We see this clearly illustrated in
the Gospel account of the wedding at
Cana. In response to his mother’s quiet
intervention, they have no wine, Jesus
finally works a miracle and changes
water into wine (John 2:3).
We need to consider this incident at a
deeper level. On this level, he rejects her
intervention with words that appear at
first sight brusque and sharp: Woman,
what concern is that to you and to me?
It is a statement of disengagement,
the expression of a desire not to be
involved: ‘What has this concern
of yours to do with me?’ And the
reason he gives is My hour has not
yet come. He does not mean that the
time for performing miracles has not
yet arrived, because he goes on to do
just that. Jesus is thinking and acting
on another level. While his mother
was concerned about the scarcity of
material wine, Jesus is thinking of the
84
messianic wine – that is, the messianic
age. More than once in the Scriptures,
the messianic kingdom is described as
a banquet feast, when wine will flow in
abundance.
Throughout his Gospel, John gives
a special meaning to the word ‘hour.’
Jesus’ hour is the hour of his death
and glorification. It was an hour
determined by his Father and not able
to be anticipated by men. On several
occasions we are told that the Jews
wanted to kill Jesus, but they could
not, because his hour had not yet
come. But as the end of his public life
draws nearer, he realises that the hour
has arrived. In 12:23, Jesus says: The
hour has come for the Son of Man to be
glorified. In 13:1, John says that Jesus
knew the hour had come for him to
pass from this world to the Father.
And he begins his beautiful prayer in
chapter 17, recited on the eve of his
death, with the words, Father, the hour
has come; glorify your Son so that the
Son may glorify you (17:1).
A deeper meaning
We need, therefore, to understand the
Cana episode on two levels of meaning.
On the material or lower level, Mary
appeals to her son on behalf of the
wedding guests, and he works a miracle.
On a deeper or higher level, he rejects
her intervention at this point. He is
saying that he has his Father’s work
to do, and disengages himself from the
attachments of flesh and blood. We are
reminded of his words to his mother
as a boy of twelve, reported by Luke:
Did you not know that I must be in my
Father’s house (2:49). An alternative
translation is ‘Did you not know I must
be about my Father’s business?’
He is saying that human
relationships must not aﬀect the
direction of his mission. It is only
MARY, MOTHER OF THE CHURCH
when his hour comes – on the cross
– that the messianic wine will be
dispensed. Jesus saw everything from
the point of view of the mission
entrusted to him by his Father. He
interprets his mother’s intervention
as a request for the messianic wine, a
request he regards as premature.
Implied in his reply is the idea that
Mary is to have a limited or no role
in his ministry, and in fact she is not
mentioned again in John’s Gospel
until the cross. It must also be noted
that in this story, Mary ignored Jesus’
dismissive response and instead turned
her attention to the servants. Despite
the layers of meaning, there is still
a hint of ordinary and simple family
relationships at play.
At the cross, the hour has now
arrived – the hour set by the Father,
the hour when Jesus is crucified –
or, as John puts it, lifted up, exalted,
glorified. His messianic work is now
brought to its perfection.
All the scenes surrounding the cross
in John’s Gospel (19:17-37) have a deep,
spiritual meaning. So too, the incident
involving the mother of Jesus and the
disciple whom he loved has to be seen
as more than just a personal gesture
on Jesus’ part. It is not just the dutiful
act of a loving son, ensuring that his
mother will be cared for, when he has
gone. That is part of it, but the context
suggests more than that was involved.
It is rather a messianic act which
somehow completes his work, an act
performed at the ‘hour’ when his own
love and the love of his Father are fully
revealed.
He said to his mother: Woman, here
is your son. What is the background
behind this unusual form of address?
Inevitably we think of Eve, referred
to in Genesis (3:15) as ‘the woman.’
John, in describing the crucifixion of
Jesus, emphasises the positive aspects
85
of Jesus’ death: his kinship, the source
of unity, the giving up of the Spirit, the
outpouring of life-giving water.
Mother of all believers
John was therefore probably thinking
of the positive aspect of Eve’s
motherhood. The word ‘Eve’ in Hebrew
is associated with life, and Genesis
(3:20) says that Adam named her Eve
because she was the mother of all who
live. Now, from the time of Jesus’ hour
and exaltation, Mary too becomes
the mother of all those who live the
new life of faith. Around the cross a
new family of faith is formed, a new
people of God is born, with the beloved
disciple representing all the followers
of Jesus. For every disciple of Jesus is
loved by him. Mary for her part is the
new Eve, the spiritual mother of all
believers.
If then, she played a limited role in
the ministry of Jesus which began at
Cana, she really comes into her own
and receives her true role at the hour of
his death and glorification. His hour is
also her hour. And John concludes this
section with the words from that hour
the disciple took her into his own home
(John 19:27).
The mother of Jesus and the disciple
whom he loved thus together represent
the community of believers. Within
this community, the Church, Mary
is designated by her son to play a
mother’s role. She becomes the mother
of all those who through faith are
brothers and sisters of Jesus. This is
the reason why Catholics acknowledge
Mary as the mother of the Church.
Mary is thus one of the great gifts left
to us as a bequest by the dying Christ.
His death gave unity to his followers
(the seamless tunic: John 19:23-24); as
he died, he gave up his Spirit to them,
the source of the Christian life (John
19:28-30); the water flowing from his
side was also a symbol of this new life
which he gave (John 19:31-37). And as
well, he gave us his mother to be the
spiritual mother of all who accept him
in faith as their king and Lord.
THE SECOND VATICAN
COUNCIL AND MARY
Let us conclude with some observations
from the Second Vatican Council about
devotion to Mary and her role in the
Church:
We have but one mediator, Christ
Jesus. The maternal relationship of
Mary toward us in no way obscures or
diminishes this unique mediation of
Christ ...
The Blessed Virgin was eternally pre-
destined to be the mother of God. By
divine providence, she served on earth as
the loving mother of the divine redeemer
... She conceived, brought forth, and
nourished Christ ... She was united with
him in su!ering as he died on the cross.
In a singular way, she cooperated by her
obedience, faith, hope and love, in the
86
Saviour’s work of restoring supernatural
life to souls. For this reason she is a
mother to us in the order of grace.
This motherhood of Mary in the order
of grace began with the consent which
she gave in faith at the Annunciation,
and which she sustained without
wavering beneath the cross. And now
in heaven, she does not lay aside her
motherly role, but by her many acts of
intercession continues to win for us gifts
of eternal salvation.
By her motherly love, she cares for the
brothers and sisters of her son, who still
journey on earth surrounded by dangers
and diﬃculties until they are led to their
happy homeland ...
With her as our model, the Church
grows in faith, hope and love, searching
out and doing the will of God in all
things. In our apostolic work we rightly
look to her who brought forth Christ,
so that through the Church, Christ may
be born and grow in the hearts of the
faithful also. The Virgin Mary in her own
life lived an example of that motherly
love which should motivate all who
cooperate in the mission of the Church,
for the rebirth of all men and women.
DEVOTION TO MARY
Catholics honour Mary for two reasons:
firstly because of her unique role as
mother of Christ and secondly, because
she is a model of faith. Because of these
two dimensions, Catholics have formed
a special devotion to her. They see
her not as a goddess or a superhuman
being, but as one of them. But because
God chose her to be the mother of
his own Son, Jesus, they hold her in
particularly high regard. She too was
human, she had to be redeemed, she
had to live in faith and hope, like the
rest of us.
As with the other saints of the
Church, we see her as a model and an
MARY, MOTHER OF THE CHURCH
inspiration for our Christian life. We
believe also in her power of intercession
with the risen Lord, her Son.
Again, as with the other saints, we
pray not so much to her as with her,
recognising that God alone is the One
who ultimately accepts and grants
our prayers. The invocation we make
to her is Pray for us, that is, speak on
our behalf, intercede for us with your
Son. We see her as the mother of the
Church, the first among the saints,
praying with the Church and for the
Church.
The Marian prayer which Catholics
learn from early childhood is the ‘Hail
Mary.’ The first part of this prayer is
strictly biblical, containing the words
addressed to Mary by God’s messenger,
Gabriel, and by her relative, Elizabeth:
Hail Mary, full of grace, the Lord is with
you; blessed are you among women,
and blessed is the fruit of your womb,
Jesus. After the Council of Trent (16th
century), the Church formally added
the second part: Holy Mary, mother of
God, pray for us sinners now and at the
hour of our death.
The Rosary
The great prayer honouring Mary
is the Rosary, a devotion which is a
meditation on the important events
in the lives of Jesus and his mother.
It comprises twenty ‘decades’, each
consisting of the Our Father, ten Hail
Marys, and the prayer in praise of the
Trinity: ‘Glory be to the Father ...’
These twenty decades or mysteries
are divided into four groupings: the
Joyful Mysteries; the Mysteries of
Light; the Sorrowful Mysteries, and
the Glorious Mysteries. It has been
customary to pray the joyful mysteries
on Mondays and Saturdays, the
mysteries of light on Thursdays, the
sorrowful on Tuesdays and Fridays,
87
and the glorious on Wednesdays and
Sundays. The titles of the twenty
mysteries are as follows:
Joyful:
1. Annunciation
2. Visitation of Elizabeth
3. Birth of Jesus
4. Presentation of child Jesus in Temple
5. Finding of child Jesus
Sorrowful:
1. Agony in Garden
2. Scourging
3. Crowning with Thorns
4. Carrying of Cross
5. Crucifixion
Glorious:
1. Resurrection
2. Ascension
3. Coming of Holy Spirit
4. Assumption of Mary into heaven
5. Crowning of Mary as Queen of Heaven
Light:
1. The Baptism in the Jordan
2. The wedding feast of Cana
3. The proclamation of the kingdom of
God
4. The Transfiguration
5. The institution of the Eucharist
Devotion to Mary has received great
impetus from alleged appearances
made by her to children in various
parts of the world. Some of the most
famous and most popular include at
Guadalupe in Mexico (1531), Lourdes in
France (1858), Fatima in Portugal (1917).
A Catholic is not obliged to believe
in these ‘private’ revelations, though
millions accept their truth. At least in
the case of Lourdes, well-documented
and scientifically tested miracle cures
make it di!cult not to accept that
the power of God has been at work in
response to Mary’s intercession.
88
Feasts and doctrines
During the Church’s liturgical year,
there are a number of feast days
celebrated in honour of Mary. Two of
these feasts celebrate two dogmas about
Mary proclaimed in recent Church
history: the Immaculate Conception,
promulgated by Pope Pius IX in 1854,
and celebrated on December 8; and her
Assumption into Heaven, promulgated
by Pope Pius XII in 1950, and celebrated
on August 15.
The first of these doctrines (the
Immaculate Conception) proposed
to Catholics for their acceptance in
faith that Mary herself was conceived
free from original sin. Because of
her privileged choice by God to be
the mother of his son, the belief of
the Church is that she was redeemed
‘in advance’ at the moment of her
conception, as we are by Baptism. At
Baptism, we say to the newly-baptised:
you have become a new creation. Put
simply, this is what is at the heart
of the doctrine of the Immaculate
Conception of Mary.
The Assumption is an expression
of belief that Mary, because of her
faith and holiness and motherhood of
Jesus, has already been admitted in her
full personhood (body and soul) into
the enjoyment of the full and eternal
vision of God – a state which for the
rest of saved humanity will come at a
later time. We say in the Creed, I look
forward to the resurrection of the dead.
Put simply, this is what is at the heart
of the doctrine of the Assumption.
Both doctrines assert that the hopes of
our faith have already been fulfilled in
Mary. Mary is the model and pioneer of
faith. Mary does not possess a diﬀerent
‘kind’ of humanity from the rest of the
human family.
Neither of these doctrines is
contained in Scripture. Neither can be
‘proved’. They are a matter of faith and
were part of the Church’s traditional
faith long before the dogmas were
proclaimed. A feast celebrating the
Immaculate Conception of Mary goes
back many centuries.
Another important Marian feast is
that of Mary, Mother of God, celebrated
in the Church on the first day of the
New Year. This does not mean of
course that Mary is the mother of the
eternal Trinity of persons. However,
because her son Jesus is truly God
as well as truly man, she is rightly
honoured as mother of God.
Mary’s virginity
Both Luke and Matthew agree on the
virginal conception of Jesus, that is,
that Jesus had no human father, but
was conceived by the Holy Spirit, born of
the Virgin Mary, as the Creed a!rms
(see Luke 1:34-35; Matthew 1:18-25).
As various forms of Christian witness
developed, the conviction that Mary
remained always a virgin came to be
MARY, MOTHER OF THE CHURCH
held as Catholic doctrine. The Gospels
leave undecided the question of the
‘brothers’ and ‘sisters’ of Jesus (Mark
6:3). Holding onto the idea of Mary’s
virginity, the ancient Church fathers
(early Christian writers) interpreted
these passages in various ways. Some,
for example, particularly in the East,
suggested that Joseph married Mary
as an elderly widower and already had
children of his own. Others suggested
that the terms ‘brothers’ and ‘sisters’
were best understood to mean ‘cousins’
and broader kindred, and it is this
interpretation which has become
the standard. By the 4th century,
particularly through the writings of
St Jerome, the Church had come to see
Mary’s life-long virginity as part of
her commitment to her Son and his
mission.
Such ‘development of doctrine’
remains a point of diﬀerence between
Catholics and Protestants, though
it is worth noting that the leading
Reformers – Martin Luther, John Calvin
and John Wesley – all defended the
89
perpetual virginity of Mary. It was later
generations of Protestant reformers,
particular during the Enlightenment
period of the 18th century, who
developed the dominant view of
mainline Protestant theology that
these ‘brothers’ and ‘sisters’ were ‘true
siblings’ of Jesus.
Mary’s virginity should be seen
as more than a physical or biological
issue. It rather symbolises her profound
attitude of total openness to God alone.
Mary is a figure and symbol of the
Church, and her virginity is a prophetic
sign of the Church’s total dedication
to Christ. She is the ideal Christian,
completely given only to God.
A modern Protestant theologian
has written of this aspect of Mary
with great insight: Her unique
relationship with the Spirit sets her in
such close proximity to God that she
must remain alone in order to point out
to our eyes this unique choice of her
Lord ... Her virginity appears at one and
the same time as a sign of consecration
and a sign of solitary powerlessness
which gives glory to the fullness and
power of God ... a sign of poverty, of
humility, and of waiting upon God ... a
sign of emptiness and total trust in God
who makes rich such poor creatures as
we are (Max Thurian, Mary, Mother of
All Christians).
READ
When you read the Gospel for the next
Sunday’s Mass, do it as we are told Mary
did: Mary treasured all these words and
pondered them in her heart. (Luke 2:19)
SHARE
• How do you see Mary as a model of
faith and discipleship?
• What would it have been like for
Mary to stand at the foot of the
Cross?
• What is your understanding of how
Catholics pray with Mary and the
Saints?
PRAY
My soul proclaims
the greatness of the Lord,
and my spirit rejoices
in God my Saviour,
for God has looked with favour
on the lowliness of his servant.
Surely, from now on,
all generations will call me blessed.
(The Canticle of Mary, Luke 1:46-48)
RESEARCH
Catechism of the Catholic Church:
Nos 963-975
90