0:00 Hey everyone, this is Liam here from Archdiocese and Ministries, and I'm just here to show you how to use the new platform that we've developed for submitting daily gospel reflections.
0:11 In the past, it's been Word documents, emailed, and it's a bit of a mess. We just wanted to make it super easy for people to grab a webpage, see all their assigned reflections, submit them, see the gospel text, and that's it.
0:24 Have it a super simple process for you to be a part of this team. So, you should have got an email, with some information about how to get into the portal.
0:35 You'll see that it's this little link here. So, it's got some, some information here, but this is the main link that you'll need.
0:42 I would suggest pinning this email and possibly even bookmarking it. Bookmarking the page. So, let's just go in and have a look.
0:52 Once I click that link, you can see that we've got some, some of our reflections here that are assigned on the left.
1:00 So, these are the dates that, that you've been assigned. And then, as I click through them, I can see my ability to input the reflection of for those dates.
1:11 So, let's go to February 23rd. In this, I can see the, the readings for that day. I can see the gospel text of that day.
1:18 So, it's super easy to just read it and reflect straight, straight from this webpage. And then, my ability to submit the title, gospel quote, and the reflection itself.
1:29 So, I'm just gonna quickly write one in now. Call it Judgment. Give it a, a gospel quote. Matthew 25, 43.
1:50 And then, I'm gonna write my reflection. So, just as you would normally. Okay. So, that's my, I'm gonna start writing there.
2:03 As you can see in the top right-hand corner, this is saving as we go. So, you can save your draft as well.
2:08 and that draft is now saved. So, if I come back to this, if I leave the page and come back, it's all still in there, it's all saved.
2:16 don't worry about, you know, half doing it and having to go and do something else and come back later. That's all fine because it's all saved in the platform.
2:24 Once I feel like it's ready to go, I'm around the 250 word mark, all I need to do is hit submit and that submission will go through to the admin team and we'll, we'll get it edited for you.
2:36 So, I can see my submitted ones here, I can see the ones that I haven't started and my drafts as well, if I've got any.
2:44 Just a note as well, if you've got you feel like, you've, you've checked another source, like a Universalis or some other, some auto or something and you've seen that the readings have a discrepancy for the date, there, there's a, there's a few proper possible edge cases that we haven't foreseen that
3:00 some dates might be wrong in terms of the readings. It should be rare, but if it happens we have an ability for you to edit that, so just hit edit, and you can edit the readings there.
3:08 There, to the ones that you see that are correct, I wouldn't worry about it, I would just use, use the readings as they are because it's, it's, it shouldn't happen, but if it does you have a, you have a, an ability to edit that.
3:19 Cool, if this is in the way, this gospel text, you can just hit hide gospel text here and that will go away for you, so you got a nice clean working area.
3:28 If you have any issues with this at all, feel free to to email me or give me a call in work hours, and I know there's some, maybe some edge cases or maybe some other methods that people might feel comfortable writing in, in a normal, like, Word document, that's totally fine, you can just copy and paste
3:44 that over, so once you finish writing your reflection, just paste your reflection text into the different, fields, like the title, the gospel quote, and the, and the reflection text.
3:52 text itself, and submit it, and that way it's just super easy and everyone's going through the same method, if it's completely crazy for you and you can't figure it out, we can still receive emails, in the, in the old way, but this should be a really, really easy way for you guys to, to submit your daily
4:09 gospel reflections. Thank you so much for being part of the team, you're amazing, and see you next time.